## What are factors shaping the natal dispersal distance?
Natal dispersal, defined as the movement from an individual’s birthplace to first breeding location, is one of the major lifetime events that all living species must make. Despite its ecological importance, little is known about the information naïve young juveniles use to decide how far they travel while securing their lifetime breeding career. In species capable of delaying their first breeding attempt, dispersal decisions may be influenced by a combination of prey scarcity, territorial availability, and age. Similarly, birds, including raptors, tend to disperse more when facing food shortages (Greenwood & Harvey, 1982). Population density is another factor that young adults are likely to use as a decision cue; however, the response may vary even under the same conditions. For example, semi-colonial Egyptian vultures (_Neophron percnopterus_) in Spain and France disperse less during high population, which might be perceived as a signal of high-quality habitat (Serrano et al., 2021). In contrast, American kestrels (_Falco sparverius_) on the American continent disperse further probably to avoid competition pressure (McCaslin et al., 2020). Age, particularly in species capable of delaying their first breeding age, is an additional factor of concern. Older individuals generally tend to disperse further (Azpillaga et al., 2018; Greenwood & Harvey, 1982). However, the dispersal decisions made by floaters are likely more complex (Penteriani & Delgado, 2009), and observation rate may also play a significant role in calculating first breeding age. This research aims to investigate the factors that influence the natal dispersal distance, focusing on the role of prey abundance, population density, and age at first breeding. 
## Study system
### Kielder Forest
Kielder Forest, the largest man-made forest in England, was established from the 1920s as a part of an afforestation programme for timber production. The forest ranges in elevation from 200 to 300 m, forming valleys around a large reservoir located at its centre. Once an open agricultural area, the landscape is now dominated by Sitka spruce (_Picea sitchensis_) followed by Norway spruce (_Picea abies_) (McIntosh, 1995). Under the current management regime, approximately 9000 ha year-1  of timber is harvested annually, with adjacent area left uncut for at least five years (McIntosh, 1995). These practices, coupled with 40 years of growing cycle required for these species to reach harvest maturity, have resulted in a dynamic, patchy landscape. The clear-felled area also provides suitable habitat for voles to thrive for at least five years following timber operations.  
The field vole (_Microtus agrestis_), which is most commonly found in grassland patches, is a key prey species supporting many predators in the Kielder Forest ecosystem. The abundance of field vole fluctuates on a 3-4 year cycle (Figure 1), shaping both population dynamics and intraguild prey-predator interaction. (Lambin et al., 2000,; Petty, 1992). 
 
Figure 1. Trend in vole abundance (vole/ha) from 1985 to 2024. Green dots represent abundance estimates from spring survey, while yellow dots indicate results from autumn survey. Red dashed lines denote the boundaries of each vole population cycle.
First confirmed in 2018 in Kielder Forest, the Pine marten (Martes martes) is an opportunistic omnivore and is one of the meso-predators that primarily hunt field voles. As skilled tree climbers, pine martens are able to switch to alternative prey such as birds’ eggs, including those of owls, when rodent populations are low (Zárybnická et al., 2015). Studies have shown that pine martens memorise the locations of previously visited nest boxes (Sonerud, 1985, 2022) posing a threat to territorial raptors that rarely change nesting sites. 


## References
* Azpillaga, M., Real, J., & Hernández-Matías, A. (2018). Effects of rearing conditions on natal dispersal processes in a long-lived predator bird. Ecology and Evolution, 8(13), 6682–6698. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.4165
* Greenwood, P. J., & Harvey, P. H. (1982). The Natal and Breeding Dispersal of Birds. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 13, 1–21.
* McCaslin, H. M., Caughlin, T. T., & Heath, J. A. (2020). Long-distance natal dispersal is relatively frequent and correlated with environmental factors in a widespread raptor. Journal of Animal Ecology, 89(9), 2077–2088. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2656.13272
* McIntosh, R. (1995). The history and multi-purpose management of Kielder Forest. Forest Ecology and Management, 79(1–2), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/0378-1127(95)03628-8
* Penteriani, V., & Delgado, M. M. (2009). Thoughts on Natal Dispersal. Journal of Raptor Research, 43(2), 90–98. https://doi.org/10.3356/JRR-08-39.1
* Serrano, D., Cortés-Avizanda, A., Zuberogoitia, I., Blanco, G., Benítez, J. R., Ponchon, C., Grande, J. M., Ceballos, O., Morant, J., Arrondo, E., Zabala, J., Montelío, E., Ávila, E., González, J. L., Arroyo, B., Frías, Ó., Kobierzycki, E., Arenas, R., Tella, J. L., & Donázar, J. A. (2021). Phenotypic and environmental correlates of natal dispersal in a long-lived territorial vulture. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 5424. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-84811-8
